---
id: 1778
title: Anti dystopian view on ubiquitous surveillance
date: 2016-06-04T11:03:35+00:00
author: Jilles
layout: post
guid: http://www.jillesvangurp.com/?p=1778
permalink: /?p=1778
categories:
  - Blog Posts
tags:
  - berlin
  - George Orwell
  - Germany
  - NSA
---
Like many others, I read 1984 by George Orwell in which he described a very disturbing world where the state spied on all its citizens through a massive surveillance program. This dystopian world view has since dominated any and all discussion about technical progress. As a technologist this is a problem for me. On one hand, I like progress and I enjoy seeing the absolutely massive technical achievements that have happened during my lifetime and looking forward to things yet to come. But I also see the dark side of things. I live a few hundred meters from the Berlin wall memorial center on a street that is literally still intersected by what remains of that wall (the Bergstrasse). People used to get shot there and the antics of the Stasi are well documented. As are those of the Nazis before them. This city has a rich history.

So you might deduce from the above that I hold a very pessimistic view about our future and envisage the same dystopian society that George Orwell predicted. However, I'm not that pessimistic and I believe there's some reason for hope. Don't get me wrong, ubiquitous surveillance is happening and there's going to be more of it, not less. In short, we've seen nothing yet in terms of technical capability and its use. Right now most people carry with them a smart phone. It's near impossible to be in a populated area without being in range of dozens of these things. Also, they have proven very hackable by criminals, spies, foreign governments, etc. That's reason for concern; especially when you consider that these devices have microphones that can be always on, GPS sensors and a permanent connection to a cell tower that also knows where the device is (roughly). Now combine that with massive evolution in the software world to do stuff with this hardware and you end up with a pretty potent mix.

Imagine an algorithm that identifies people based on their voice combined with hundreds of millions of phones with their microphones turned on listening for the magic words "OK Google ..." or "Siri". It's not a stretch of the imagination of some evil genius figuring out how to tie voice patterns to GPS coordinates and some fancy big data processing that makes sense of this to e.g. permanently track the location of all people in a particular country. Any time anyone opens their mouth in range of any smart phone, their location + identity could be logged and somebody could be choosing to listen in. All your encounters with other people can be logged, recorded, analyzed. It's very hard to not be in range of a connected recording device at this point or get to/from an area where that is possible undetected. All possible today and some pessimists assume this is already reality. This is not science fiction; all the technology needed for this exists and is widely deployed.

Yet, in practice most surveillance data is not very accessible even when it needs to be used (e.g. stopping terrorists). The problems are technical, organizational, and legal. Just because your operator knows where you are does not mean that the NSA or CIA can get away with accessing this all the time, even though they are definitely trying. Instead they sometimes get access, on a need to have basis and it generally involves dealing with foreign governments, intelligence agencies, misc. corporations and a lot of haggling over details. And even when they have access, getting information to the right persons is an issue. So, there's a lot slipping through the nets still and you could argue that the current state of the art is not quite living up to its bleak dystopian potential yet; but mostly for non technical reasons. We can't count on this staying like this forever.

There are people who think this will be the end of freedom as we know it. However, these people are assuming a traditional hierarchical power structures where a single dictator controls land and all the people on that land. The reality of this world is different. I'm in Germany and I carry a mobile phone. Who could be listening in potentially? Well, there's the German government obviously (because I'm in Germany). But they likely aren't the only ones with that ability. The NSA has proven repeatedly to not be particularly bothered by national borders. So they might be listening as well. Then there's the North Koreans, the Chinese, the Russians, misc. criminal organizations, my home country (the Netherlands), various corporate organizations in the supply chain for my phone (Google, Huawei, O2), etc. The list is quite long, actually. All these potentially have the capability of hacking my phone and listening in with varying degrees of legality as well as compromising numerous online connected services that I use or or that have information about me.

However, the good news is that these organizations are not just monitoring me but also each other. They trust each other even less than they trust me. This is what gives me hope. In a world with global, ubiquitous surveillance capability a few things are going to be true:

- Absolutely nobody will have the ability to be certain to not be under surveillance, including monarchs, billionaires, despots, criminals, citizens, etc. In fact they are more likely to be under surveillance by someone.
- This includes those surveilling others. They might be able to watch you but they won't be able to do so without risking exposure.
- Surveillance technology is going to be cheap, plentiful, and available to anyone: you cannot ever be sure about who else is watching.
- Everybody is going to want to have the best technical defenses against security breaches.

At some point surveillance data will become legal for use in court cases in some jurisdictions since ignoring it will be impractical. This will be controversial for a while but it is a matter of time when it happens. When it does, people will have some valid concerns about where the data came from, who handled it, who had access to it, the integrity of the data, etc. This will naturally lead to technical evolution to address those concerns: auditable surveillance data. 

Auditing is the process of vetting facts using some kind of inspection process. In the digital world this is facilitated by things like serial numbers, cryptography, digital signatures, block chains, etc. Modern day security practices often refer to the so called gold standard of triple AU (gold): Authentication, Authorization, and Auditing. You can't have security unless you cover all three of these topics. Auditing in the context of security means being able to verify whether everybody is being authenticated and authorized properly according to whatever rules apply and detecting whether there are any violations of these rules. In practice security auditing is a pretty broad topic that involves logging what happens, analyzing source code and algorithms for weaknesses, testing security mechanisms by attempting to abuse them and doing all this in a systematic manner. Usually security incidents ultimately are revealed or analyzed through some form of internal or external auditing and most responsible organizations evolve complex processes to minimize the risk nothing of bad things happening to them again. 

When applied to ubiquitous surveillance, auditing is going to be pretty important. There are going to be many sources of auditing data and not all of them are going to be trustworthy. There is going to be a large volume of this data and it will be archived for extensive periods of time. More importantly, access to this data will be monitored and tampering with this data will be a crime that will require such levels of technical skill and risk that it will not be very practical because 1) it is hard 2) it is likely to be noticed and observed by someone.

People are going to want to be able to trace back the origin of surveillance data when it is presented to them so that they can verify its authenticity, integrity, origin, and means of acquisition. Organizations currently conducting surveillance at scale are going to be confronted with counter surveillance by potentially hostile organizations and legal audits in case they mess up. This will cause them to evolve processes to ensure that no bad things can happen to them. Particularly, they'll want to prevent others being able to present fully auditable evidence of them doing any illegal things that can be used against them in a court of law. Last time I checked, NSA employees did not really have a special status in the US. They merely evade criminal litigation by hiding what they are doing and are essentially operation on some very ambiguous legal boundaries. I predict that their ability to hide like that will diminish over time because of counter surveillance and that organizations like the NSA will evolve to mitigate against that by covering their ass in any way they possibly can. They have a million+ people working for them, all of whom have very good reasons for being deeply paranoid about being watched by their own colleagues given the whole Snowden thing. Given that, what would you think the willingness levels are inside the NSA to do anything that is not strictly legal and authorized in a ironclad way? I imagine people are very much on their toes there already when it comes to doing "the right thing".

Some states might opt for the traditional dictatorial model of having one bad guy in charge of all the other bad guys who then get away with doing bad things. Covering up ugly truths with propaganda, lies, and destruction of evidence are the way you get away with this historically. However, these states still have to deal with the reality of hostile cross border surveillance of all their acts. Historically, deniability always was the one thing that kept dictators in power and out of prison. This too is a lesson well remembered in Germany. Post WW-II the Neurenberg trials condemned large numbers of people based on what is essentially a bureaucratic audit trail of the holocaust. Likewise, post communism access to Stasi archives got a lot of people in trouble as well. The international court in The Hague is regularly putting bad guys behind bars that thought they could get away with stuff. 

With mass availability of fully auditable, historical surveillance data, permanently getting away with doing bad things is going to be harder, not easier. Doing bad things includes abusing surveillance data, blackmailing people using illegally obtained surveillance data, genocide etc. Ubiquitous surveillance is happening, whether we like it or not. Auditing and counter surveillance is going to be the only way we can prevent this from escalating the way George Orwell envisioned. In the Orwellian world nobody was watching the watchers. We can and should watch the watchers and let them know we're watching them. 

I think the situation in Russia is particularly interesting currently since it is a classic Orwellian surveillance state/kleptocracy without independent press. There appears to be a growing amount of evidence (e.g. the Panama papers) that essentially suggests Putin is enriching himself to the extent of billions. What's lacking is a smoking gun in terms of e.g. video footage, recorded conversations, of Putin being in places where he shouldn't be. But how certain can he be that that does not exist? Also, what happens when he is removed from power and what happens to those around him that are currently protecting him? His ability to stay in power is the only thing that keeps him out of jail and it depends on his own people believing his version of the story. That might prove to be harder in the future. 
 

