---
id: 1461
title: The future of mobile
date: 2013-01-11T18:32:35+00:00
author: Jilles
layout: revision
guid: http://www.jillesvangurp.com/2013/01/11/1447-revision-5/
permalink: /2013/01/11/1447-revision-5/
---
I recently left Nokia. Nokia is a great company to start my own company. Nokia pioneered mobile telephony together with the likes of Ericsson and Motorola and had a huge influence in the market through the last two decades.  Nokia was doing great when I joined in late 2005. Market share was soaring to new highs, cool gadgets were launched every few months. Then something happened that has been written a lot about. First the iphone launched and roughly a year later Google unleashed Android. I'm not going to rehash that. That's the past of mobile. This article is about the future and the future is Linux.

In the year ahead, at least three new Linux mobile platforms are going to launch:
<ul>
	<li>Tizen (formerly known as Meego, Maemo, and a few other names) backed by Intel, Samsung and others.</li>
	<li>Jolla, which is a spinoff of Maemo by some of its former development team in Nokia.</li>
	<li>Ubuntu just announced they have a phone OS as well.</li>
</ul>
This is in addition to Bada (Samsung), Android (Google), Web OS (Palm/HP) and a few smaller/deprecated platforms. Android particularly is very successful with a market share that is well above 50% now in the smart phone market.

The point that most people miss when discussing platforms is that these platforms overlap to a very large extent. These are not isolated software stacks. Instead we are talking about a family of platforms that are largely based on the same open source components (kernel, tools, drivers, libraries, application frameworks.

The fact that these platform are all Linux based is significant. It's the reason that a small Finnish start up (Jolla) can launch a new mobile platform that (from the looks of it) is competitive with software stacks pushed by the likes of Samsung, Google, and Microsoft. The reason this is possible at all is that the cost for launching a new mobile platform is lower than ever. It's low enough that a small startup can do it within a year of being founded.

That is deeply disruptive and it means a bunch of things:
<ul>
	<li>Any proprietary software stack, regardless of current success or market share, will have to match (dollar for dollar, development hour for hour, feature for feature) the collective and cumulative investment that is happening in the Linux world. Or put differently: hundreds of companies are collaborating on Linux and a huge stack of associated software. This stack represents an ongoing annual investment that ranges in the billions that has been sustained for well over a decade now. Good luck keeping up if you are not part of that.</li>
	<li>IOS and Windows Phone are both very nice platforms. But they are built on a foundation that is largely not technically superior in any way when compared to the free and open source Linux stacks out there. Sure both platforms have nice features to differentiate but that's like the tip of the iceberg in terms of actual platform code. Is the OS X kernel so much better than Linux (rather the reverse I suspect)? Is it worth the extra cost of porting it to new chips, developing drivers, ensuring compilers play nice with it, etc? I think not.</li>
	<li>Maintaining and continuing to develop a largely proprietary platform represents an enormous commitment and investment that is unlikely to provide any substantial future differentiation relative to Linux. Worse, this will largely have to be financed out of margins on products that are competing with similar products from other manufacturers that don't have this burden.</li>
	<li>Despite the fact that Apple and Microsoft are huge, I don't think either can afford to continue to poor money in a non Linux code base that offers little technical advantage over readily available &amp; free technology used by their competitors. Given their inertia, they are likely to take years to come to this conclusion themselves though. During these years there will be a steady decline in relevance and market share. Apple just peaked with their market share and stock price.</li>
	<li>Nokia, my former employer, spend hundreds of millions on Linux before giving up on it and going against the trend by betting on Microsoft's proprietary software stack just as Linux (in the form of Android) was getting huge traction in the market. Arguably that was a pretty strange move by Nokia. I suspect they may do somewhat well short term (the next few years). However, long term, I see no future for the platform.</li>
	<li>One thing is certain though: mobile Linux improved hugely partially thanks to Nokia spending huge amounts of money on it. Those improvements directly benefited anybody doing linux based platforms. Including direct competitors such as Android. Essential driver work, kernel optimizations, and work on QT, QML and other technologies were financed by Nokia and are now part of the open technology stack that it is trying to compete against.</li>
	<li>Android as we know it today (a Google branded, Java based UI) may or may not survive. Given that it is open source and effectively a linux distribution, the technical distinction with other Linux based platforms is somewhat blurry to begin with in any case. Android applications are supported on Google's platform, but also on Jolla. Apparently RIM has made them work on their platform (QNX) as well. Ubuntu already is compatible with Android to the extent that it can boot using the Android kernel. Android applications run fine in Linux, Apple, and Windows based development environments with a generic virtual machine (Java) and Google's development tooling. The point here is that Android as a mobile platform is a non entity. It's a Java based application framework that can run pretty much anywhere with very little effort. The kernel, associated drivers, libraries and tools is more appropriately referred to as Linux.</li>
</ul>
So far, all I've done is talk about what is the situation today. This article promised to be about the future. So here are some predictions:
<ul>
	<li>Hardware &amp; device manufacturing cost for something capable of running Linux  will decrease from about 100-200$ today to be in the range of well below 50$ in the next few years. Cheap chips, memory, screens, batteries, radios etc. will enable this.</li>
	<li>This means that the feature phone market (50-150$  devices) that is currently still dominated by proprietary, rather unfashionable software stacks (Nokia S30 &amp; S40, Blackberry, Samsung, etc.) will be flooded with smart phone technology powered by Linux. Current Android feature phones in this price range tend to suck mainly due to resource limitations.</li>
	<li>The way the chip market works on mobile is that new hardware platforms are targeted at high end devices for a premium price. As the platform ages, production becomes cheaper and more scalable and finds its way into ever cheaper products. The current quad core ARM chips should reach the low end of the market over the course of just a few short years. Today's feature phones run at speeds that were considered high end just three to four years ago.</li>
	<li>This means mobile Linux will grow from having hundreds of millions of users to having billions of users, probably in the next two years.</li>
	<li>Those billions of networked devices will be connected to the internet and update over the air.</li>
	<li>The net result is billions of devices that are running Linux. Due to the low cost of the platform, there will be many manufacturers using it. Due to to OTA capabilities of these devices, manufacturers will differentiate by using this capability (as opposed to artificially differentiating by never updating today). Moreover, there will be little incentive to customize most of the stack unless it adds value and is worth the trouble. As a result, this will be a very homogeneous eco system of highly compatible Linux devices.</li>
	<li>That's a huge ecosystem compared to the walled gardens full of boring fart applications, disgruntled poultry tossing games, and other crap ware. The last time we had something remotely similar, Bill Gates became the world's richest person in a few short years. This ecosystem will be magnitudes larger and reach billions rather than hundreds of millions of people.</li>
</ul>
But that's just the next few years. If devices are cheap, plentiful, get their software updates over the network and can access the user's profile data in the cloud, why would you have only one device? Imagine your phone, tablet, laptop, camera, car, tv, ipod, etc. were all connected. Would you still want to have a smart phone that tries to compete with all these? Why not simply pick up the camera to take a photo and then edit it on your laptop from the cloud before showing it to your friend on your tablet, phone, or whatever other screen is in reach.

Products in the current market have some strange limitations that I think will very soon start disappearing. Sim cards for example lock a device to a network. It's a weird authentication solution from the days that networks were about telephony and not about connecting to the internet.

This relates to another limitation: operators. An operator provides services that you mostly don't need and one service you actually do need: internet connectivity. To ensure you actually continue to use those other services there are all sorts of weird constructions that involve numbers of minutes and messages, monopolistic deals with manufacturers to keep certain applications off phones in exchange for contract deals, complex rates for calling to different parts of the world and even more complex schemes for separating people from their cash simply by being mobile. Operators are currently in the business of making it very hard for people to connect their devices to the internet. I've hoped this would change for about a decade and there are signs that things are starting to move here.

On the UI side things are about to get interesting as well. The current market is highly fragmented with a complex, multi dimensional ecosystem of frameworks, manufacturers, screen sizes, tool kits and versions. Only one platform actually works more or less reliably across all of them: html 5. Html 5 is currently somewhat limited and people seem to prefer so'called native apps. Native is a relative term of course. What people really refer to is consistency with overall device look and feel, responsiveness of the application, and fluidity of animations. I think that the current generation of windows phone, qml, and android already show that a combination of javascript, xml, and a well performing engine can pass for native here. There are few technical issues remaining that prevent the browser from being this engine. So, my view on this is that this is a temporary problem that may actually go away as browser technology continues to mature and expand.

Another weird issue is the notion of application packaging and delivery. The logistics around this involve dealing with silo specific application stores, delivering binaries to this store, and orchestrating the distribution to devices in a timely fashion. It's a mess. Web applications on the other hand just run when you need them to without any of that.

The way I see the future is that of a period of it being blocked on chip manufacturers figuring out how to deliver the goods, encumbent vendors figuring out how to adapt (or rolling over to die), operators giving up on hardware sims (and otherwise stepping out of the way), software to mature.

When this eventually happens, it will open up a market of billions of highly compatible Linux running devices that server next gen web based applications to basically the whole world. My guess is we're about three to five years from that moment.

It so happens that building a successful company, which is what I am currently spending my time on, takes a similar amount of time. Hence the above analysis and writeup. I'll leave you to ponder how the above translates into what I should and should not be doing in the next few years.

&nbsp;