---
id: 736
title: N900
date: 2010-05-27T09:02:22+00:00
author: Jilles
layout: revision
guid: http://www.jillesvangurp.com/2010/05/27/735-revision/
permalink: /2010/05/27/735-revision/
---
Yesterday, my N900 arrived at my desk. The Nokia N900 is a successor to the N770, N800 and N810 internet tablet devices. Unlike those, this one is a proper phone. The tablets were quite popular and I indeed still love my N800, which I used a few years ago in a research project and which now is in my bed room where I use it for some ... eh ... late night surfing. Anyway, great device and excellent browser (mozilla based).

I ordered the N900 through our lovely internal ordering system on January 29th. Owing to, presumably, the popularity of the device, and various bureaucratic hurdles, it took a whopping 4.5 months for it to be delivered. Just in time for a firmware upgrade since the PR 1.2 firmware was made available today. Or rather, one day too early since I spent yesterday evening playing with and customizing the device. All this work I had to redo because my (extensive) fooling around basically made the normal OTA (over the air) update process not work and I had to actually flash the device instead of being able to apt-get dist-upgrade the device.

So, what's great about this phone and what is not? I work for Nokia so I am somewhat constrained here and the usual disclaimers apply about this being my own opinion and not an official Nokia point of view. But I wouldn't be writing this if I was not overall very pleased with the phone. This is by far the best phone I've ever had. 

But I wouldn't recommend it to anyone. Nor would Nokia, this phone is explicitly aimed at early adopters and enthusiasts. It's a test bed for more good stuff. It has some rough edges that are compensated with excellent online support where you can find workarounds and in depth discussions of all sorts of N900 topics.

But lets start with the good stuff:
<ul>
	<li>The software is a Debian based linux distribution called Maemo. It ships with a terminal; openssh server+client install can be done from the application manager, or if you prefer using the familiar apt-get. If you are not a developer / command line enthusiast, you probably won't care about this. But I am both, and having a phone that works this way suits me fine. When I say Debian based I mean it comes with root access, a terminal, ssh deamon and the apt-get packaging system. This is not some completely locked down firmware that happens to have a linux kernel inside: it is a proper linux distribution where you (the user) have full access to anything ranging from the kernel and kernel modules to application frameworks, configuration, the filesystem, etc. Other phones require extensive hacking to be able to do what you can do on this phone out of the box.</li>
	<li>Even if you don't care about the nerdy features, a nice side effect of the software being a proper linux distribution is that it is rock solid, stable, fast, and endlessly tweakable and extensible. You might not necessarily care about extensibility either but a side effect of that is a lively development community that produces high quality, free (beer and speech) goodies such as silly games, productivity enhancements, social network, clients, etc. Additionally, a lot of existing linux software and components have been ported.</li>
	<li>But even if you don't care about the excellent selection of third party free goodies, it still matters because Maemo is packed with features that have been built on top of great OSS software that is part of the linux ecosystems. So, out of the box it does skype, SIP, and Google Talk VOIP. It ships with support for several IM protocols and social networks. It plays all sorts of obscure file formats really well. And you can make phone calls too. This thing is like a swiss army knife when it comes to communication and media playback. 

Anything you can think of, it can probably do. I've so far tried calls, skype calls, sip calls, mail for exchange, gmail, twitter, facebook. I played back some movies, mp3s, youtube (using the full, flash based website). It all just works. Well except for skype video which for some reason failed to work for me.</li>
	<li>The UI is a big step forward if you are used to Nokia S40 and S60 devices. As you may know, a big upgrade in the form of Symbian 4 is forthcoming and the UI for the Maemo platform will be redone as well (Meego). But still, the current Maemo UI is pretty slick. The future Meego UI will be QT based instead of GTK, and of course the latest N900 firmware ships with the necessary QT bits and pieces for that already. So several applications on it are already QT based and many more will come out in the next few months. By the time Meego hits the market, there will be loads of goodies waiting to install on it.</li>
	<li>Performance and responsiveness are great. Even with several applications and browser windows open. Considering competing vendors still struggle with shipping decent multi tasking, the N900 is really the only game in town when it comes to this. Again, this relates to this device being a proper linux distribution. All that Maemo did was take the existing virtual memory infrastructure, memory managent facilities, power management facilities in linux and use it. Well, presumably there was a good bit of tweaking, modifying and contributing to the kernel as well.</li>
	<li>The hardware is a bit bulky but pretty solid. I like it and it is pocket friendly enough for me. The key board slides out with a firm click, the buttons on the keyboard have a nice solid feel. It has a good camera and the touch screen is quite OK for a resistive touch screen (quite a bit more responsive than my old N800).</li>
</ul>

But as I said, this phone is not for anyone. It has some definite rough edges and I had to Google my way around several issues that would have been real show stoppers if I didn't know where to look and what to look for. The biggest problem was getting my WLAN connected at home. Problem number 1 was that it insisted on some weird pin code mechanism that my router does not support in any obvious way. I had to go to settings->internet connections to be able set up my connection the normal way (i.e. connect, enter a passphrase, done). The second problem was that the power saving is overly aggressive. So connections kept timing out because the radios were being switched off. Solution, turn the power management down a notch in the advanced properties for the connection. Both issues are of course not very nice if you are expecting a more smooth product experience.  Judging from the ease with which I found the solution with Google in no time, I'm not the only one running into this. Once properly tweaked, the connection management is really nice btw. I mostly don't have to think about it. I did install some applets to switch the wireless lan off and to switch the phone to more energy efficient 2G. This is great when you need the device to stay up for longer than a working day.

Other rough issues include some minor UI and usability issues. I found several places where it was (supposedly) doing something that was taking a couple of seconds without providing some visual feedback. The first few times this happened I feared something had crashed or frozen when in fact it was just doing something that was just taking a bit longer. The main problem is not the duration but the lack of feedback about what is going on. It's actually a very responsive and fast device otherwise. The UI is overall very nice and finger friendly (I only need the stylus on websites with tiny links) but it does feel a bit unpolished in some corners.

Other than that, I had some issues updating to the latest firmware with my mac (should be no issue on windows). Due to me heavily customizing everything in sight, I apparently lost the ability to do a OTA upgrade and had to do this the old fashioned way with the usb cable. Ultimately I found a nice wiki page explaining where to get everything needed for this and how to install the new firmware from the Mac OS X command line. Suits me fine and it is actually a really convenient way of doing this, but not something for normal users obviously.  The same process works for Linux as well. Windows users obviously can use an officially supported UI tool for this and only has limited command line support. It is assumed developers use a real OS when developing for the N900.